Add flashloans docs (#451)
cowprotocol/docs: docs/cow-protocol/concepts/order-types/pay-debt-flash-loans.md

---
sidebar_position: 6
---

> # Repay debt with collateral using flash loans

Reviewer: Shouldn't the order type section be titled just 'Flash Loans,' with debt repayment described inside as the common use case? Or do we consider flash loans in CoW to be used only for this specific purpose?

Author: This file is to describe this particular use case. Ideally we will have more cases in the future.

A key use case of flash loans is the ability to repay debt with collateral, since flash loans allow users to close or reduce their debt positions without needing upfront liquidity.

Instead of requiring users to have assets readily available to repay their loans, flash loans enable them to temporarily borrow the needed funds, use those funds to repay their debt, and immediately reclaim their locked collateral. Once the collateral is received, it can be swapped or liquidated to cover the borrowed amount, ensuring the loan is repaid within the same transaction.

This approach eliminates the need for users to preemptively sell assets or find external liquidity, making it a highly flexible and efficient way to manage debt positions.

> ### How to take out a flash loan

Reviewer 2: Here you are describing how to pay back the flash loan, not how to take it out.

This can be achieved using a buy order where:

> - The **buy token** is the flash loaned asset.

Reviewer 3: Small explainer why this is the flash loan token might be good.
```suggestion
- The **buy token** is the flash loaned asset that needs to be repaid.
```

> - The **buy amount** is the exact amount needed to repay the debt (it must be sufficient to complete the transaction; otherwise, the transaction will revert!).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The **buy amount** is the exact amount needed to repay the flash loan (it must be sufficient to complete the transaction; otherwise, the transaction will revert!).
```

- The **sell token** is the asset used as collateral.
- The **sell amount** is the full collateral amount.

> The receiver must always be the settlement contract, while the protocol ensures that the funds are properly directed to the appropriate address.

Reviewer 3: wording seems a bit strange.
```suggestion
The receiver must always be the settlement contract, to let the protocol handle repaying the appropriate address for you.
```

> The receiver must always be the settlement contract, to let the protocol handle repaying the appropriate address for you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The receiver must always be the settlement contract, to let the protocol handle repaying the appropriate amount for you.
```

> When it comes to repaying debt, the approach depends on the lender's contract terms. Some lenders allow a third party to pay off the debt and transfer the unlocked funds to the owner's account, while others may not.

Reviewer 2: This sentence doesn't make a lot of sense when before you say the receiver must be the settlement contract.

Author: One is the lender of the collateral debt and the other one the flash loan lender. I made it more precise.

> #### Lender allows a third-party to repay your debt

Reviewer 3: A very important aspect that's missing is that the third party must be able to initiate the transfer of collateral tokens from the lending pool to the trader's address.
Repaying the debt and getting the collateral back can be 2 different things.
For example AAVE let's you pay back the debt of somebody else but does not let that someone move the collateral tokens to the original owner address.

Author: Reworked! Please take a look to verify it makes sense now.

> In this case, the user can sign a pre-hook that deploys a [cowshed](../../reference/sdks/cow-sdk/classes/CowShedHooks.md) to repay the debt using flash-loaned tokens. The underlying user order is then solely for repaying the required flash loan. Since the repayment is handled via `cowshed`, the user can be either an EOA (Externally Owned Account) or a contract (e.g., a SAFE wallet).

Reviewer 2: This paragraph is not clear to me. What is cowshed and how does the underlying user order? Maybe it makes sense at the top of the page to have a summary of what the user needs to sign
1. A pre hook to repay their debt using the borrowed funds and unlock the collateral
2. A buy order to recover the borrowed funds by selling some of the collateral (recipient being the settlement contract)

Also I'm confused why we talk about how we repay the loan before we talk about how to use it (but still somehow mention the repayment order in some way).

> #### Lender does not allow a third-party to repay your debt

Reviewer 2: Which protocol does this? Sounds kind of normal to allow permissionless debt repayment.

Author: It was a mistake, fixed!

> If the lender does not allow third-party debt repayment, the process becomes more involved. In this case, the repayment must come directly from the owner's account, meaning the owner cannot simply be an EOA (Externally Owned Account). Instead, it must be a smart contract (e.g.,a SAFE wallet), which can execute more complex transactions atomically. This is important because a contract can facilitate operations such as selling assets and repaying the debt in a single transaction, something an EOA cannot do.

Reviewer 3: > Instead, it must be a smart contract (e.g.,a SAFE wallet), which can execute more complex transactions atomically. This is important because a contract can facilitate operations such as selling assets and repaying the debt in a single transaction, something an EOA cannot do.

The reason why an SC can work in this case is that it can be written in a way that let's a third party initiate the withdrawal of collateral tokens. This is not possible when the collateral owner is an EOA.

> Additionally, repayment might not always involve selling the collateral token directly. In some cases, the protocol requires selling an interest-bearing version of the token instead. For example, if the collateral is aUSDC (which represents USDC deposited in Aave and earning interest), selling aUSDC instead of withdrawing and selling USDC directly ensures a more seamless repayment process. Understanding these trade-offs helps determine the correct approach based on the specific requirements of the lending protocol.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, repayment might not always involve selling the collateral token directly. In some cases, the protocol allows selling an interest-bearing version of the token instead. For example, if the collateral is aUSDC (which represents USDC deposited in Aave and earning interest), selling aUSDC instead of withdrawing and selling USDC directly ensures a more seamless repayment process. Understanding these trade-offs helps determine the correct approach based on the specific requirements of the lending protocol.
```

> ##### Example

Reviewer 2: Why is this a 5th level heading (it's not a subsection of the previous one). Should be top level imo as this is really the most concrete and understandable part.

Author: Example removed! (it will be added into the tutorial in another PR).

> Let's say user (SAFE with address `0x123...321`) borrowed 2000 USDC against 1 ETH of collateral in AAVE, and now wants to repay their debt position:

Reviewer 3: This section seems to be fairly close to the initial example I shared with you but the formatting (bullet points) doesn't seem to fit well into the surrounding docs.

```suggestion
Let's say a user (SAFE with address `0x123...321`) borrowed 2000 USDC against 1 ETH of collateral in AAVE, and now wants to repay their debt position.
```

1. The user first needs to determine the total repayment amount including accumulated interest: in this case, 2100 USDC is required to reclaim their 1 ETH collateral.

> 2. To ensure complete debt repayment, the user should set the buy amount to 2101 USDC (adding a small buffer). This approach:

Reviewer 4: It is not really clear how to calculate the buffer amount. Would 1 USDC be enough for any amount? What about other tokens?

Author: Example removed.

   - Guarantees the debt is fully repaid
   - May result in a small amount of unused USDC ("dust") returned to the user
   - Prevents the scenario where the user ends up with remaining debt dust and must make an additional transaction

> 3. The user needs to define two pre-hooks: one to repay the debt with collateral and the other for withdrawing the collateral repaid. In order to define both pre-hooks, the user needs to build both transactions with their SAFE:

Reviewer 2: Safe (or other smart contract wallet).

Can we not have the example for an EOA (unfortunately smart contract wallets are still very rare)

Author: Example removed (to be added in another PR).

   - Repay the debt by calling the [repay](https://etherscan.io/address/0x87870Bca3F3fD6335C3F4ce8392D69350B4fA4E2#writeProxyContract#F17) function of the AAVE's contract.
   - Withdraw the collateral by calling the [withdraw](https://etherscan.io/address/0x87870Bca3F3fD6335C3F4ce8392D69350B4fA4E2#writeProxyContract#F33) function of the AAVE's contract.
4. The user places a buy order:

> ```json

Reviewer 3: Plain JSON doesn't support comments or trailing commas which leads to ugly rendering here. This is supported by JSON5. Not sure if this change would actually fix the rendering issue, though.
```suggestion
```json5
```

  "sellToken": "ETH address", // collateral token (unlocked by repaying the debt)
  "sellAmount": 1e18, // we are willing to sell the entire collateral if necessary
  "buyToken": "USDC address", // originally borrowed token that was now advanced by the flash loan
  "buyAmount": 2101000000, // see appData.flashloan.amount
  "receiver": "settlementContract", // this is for repaying the flash loan
  "validTo": "now + 5m", // managing risk can be done by having a short validity
  "kind": "buy", // buy exactly the flash loaned amount and keep the surplus in the collateral token
  "partiallyFillable": false, // if an order is partially fillable, then it is not ensured the debt will be paid
  "appData": {
    "hooks": {
      "pre": [
         // First: Repay the debt
         {
            "target": "0x123...321",
            "value": "0",
            "callData": "signedRepayCall"
         },
         // Then: Withdraw the collateral
         {
            "target": "0x123...321",
            "value": "0",
            "callData": "signedWithdrawCall"
         }
      ]
    },
    "flashloan": {
      "token": "USDC",
      "amount": 2101000000 // 2101 USDC in atoms
    }
  }
}
```

> Once an order is placed within the CoW Protocol, it enters an auction batch. When a solution is found, the following steps occur:

Reviewer 2: Here we should really also link a transaction hash that shows this example

Author: @mrnaveira please can you add a TX once you do the tutorial? 🙏

1. The winning solver calls the flash loan `IFlashLoanRouter` contract.
2. The 2101 USDC gets transferred to the flash loan `IFlashLoanRouter` contract.
3. In the pre-hook:
    - Transfer 2101 USDC from the flash loan `IFlashLoanRouter` contract to the user.
    - Execute the user's pre-hook: Repay the outstanding debt.
    - The user receives their 1 ETH of collateral.
4. Transfer funds into the settlement contract.
5. Execute the user's order:
    - Swap ETH for USDC.
6. Transfer funds to the `receiver` address (funds are sent to the settlement contract, which is to itself).
7. Execute the post-interaction
    - Depending on the flash loan provider, either pay back 2101 USDC to the flash loan provider from the settlement contract, or send the funds to the flash loan `IFlashLoanRouter` contract, and then send it to the flash loan provider.

State after the order's execution

- Some portion of the 1 ETH is left as surplus in the user account
- The user either has USDC dust in their account or USDC debt dust in the debt position (depending on how the flash loan size buffer was chosen)

> - The flash loan provider got their 2101 USDC back

Reviewer: It would be nice to briefly mention somewhere in this section the specific benefits of using flash loans with CoW such as MEV protection and price improvement. I assume this is a huge deal for flash loans due to the potentially large token amounts involved. A real example of a flash loan that was MEV-attacked would be the icing on the cake to showcase these benefits.

Author: Example removed.

A key use case of flash loans is the ability to repay debt with collateral, since flash loans allow users to close or reduce their debt positions without needing upfront liquidity.

Instead of requiring users to have assets readily available to repay their loans, flash loans enable them to temporarily borrow the needed funds, use those funds to repay their debt, and immediately reclaim their locked collateral. Once the collateral is received, it can be swapped or liquidated to cover the borrowed amount, ensuring the loan is repaid within the same transaction.

This approach eliminates the need for users to preemptively sell assets or find external liquidity, making it a highly flexible and efficient way to manage debt positions.

### How to pay back a debt with collateral

This can be achieved using a buy order where:

- The **buy token** is the flash loaned asset that needs to be repaid.
- The **buy amount** is the exact amount needed to repay the flash loan (it must be sufficient to complete the transaction; otherwise, the transaction will revert!).
- The **sell token** is the asset used as collateral.
- The **sell amount** is the full collateral amount.

> The flash loan receiver must always be the settlement contract, to let the protocol handle repaying the appropriate amount for you.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The receiver of the order must always be the settlement contract, to let the protocol handle repaying the appropriate amount for you.
```

When it comes to repaying debt, the approach depends on the lender's contract terms. Some lenders allow a third party to initiate the transfer of collateral tokens from the lending pool to the trader's address, while others may not.

#### Lender allows a third-party to initiate the transfer of collateral tokens

In this case, the user can sign a pre-hook that deploys a `cowshed` to repay the debt using flash-loaned tokens. The underlying user order is then solely for repaying the required flash loan. Since the repayment is handled via `cowshed`, the user can be either an EOA (Externally Owned Account) or a contract (e.g., a SAFE wallet).

#### Lender does not allow a third-party to initiate the transfer of collateral tokens

> If the lender does not allow third-party to initiate the transfer of collateral tokens from the lending pool to the trader's address, the process becomes more involved. In this case, the repayment must come directly from the owner's account, meaning the owner cannot simply be an EOA (Externally Owned Account). Instead, it must be a smart contract (e.g.,a SAFE wallet), which can work because the contract can be written in a way that lets a third party initiate the withdrawal of collateral tokens. This is not possible when the collateral owner is an EOA.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the lender does not allow third-party to initiate the transfer of collateral tokens from the lending pool to the trader's address, the process becomes more involved. In this case, the repayment must come directly from the owner's account, meaning the owner cannot simply be an EOA (Externally Owned Account). Instead, it must be a smart contract (e.g. a SAFE wallet). That enables you to authorize function calls coming from the safe by signing them with the safe. That way you can create a hook initiating the withdrawal of the collateral tokens that a third-party can initiate. This is not possible when the collateral owner is an EOA.
```
